Update Debugging pane documentation with Spyder 6 changes (#426)
spyder-ide/spyder-docs: doc/panes/debugging.rst

Debugger
########

> The new **Debugger** pane added in Spyder 6 allows you to control the debugging process, browse and navigate the current execution stack, and view and manage active breakpoints throughout your open files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new **Debugger** pane added in Spyder 6 allows you to control the debugging process, browse and navigate the current execution stack, and view and manage active breakpoints throughout your files.
```

I think files don't need to be opened for their breakpoints to be tracked in the Debugger pane.

> This uses the enhanced IPDB debugger, which can also be controlled via the familiar commands in the toolbar and the :ref:`panes-console`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This uses the enhanced IPdb debugger, which can be controlled via the buttons in Spyder's main toolbar and the :ref:`panes-console`.
```

* Let's use the same name that is shown in our UI.
* I don't know what `also` refers to, so I'd suggest to remove it.
* For some that doesn't know about Pdb, saying `familiar` could be confusing.

.. image:: /images/debugging/debugging-console.webp
   :alt: The Spyder interface, showing an Editor file with breakpoints and debug status, the Debugger pane with the execution stack and breakpoints, and the IPython Console with debug commands

.. _panes-debugger-ipdb:
.. _panes-debugger-using:

=====================
Debugging with Spyder
=====================

> You can control debugger execution via the buttons in the :guilabel:`Debugger` pane, as well as from the :guilabel:`Debug` menu, the buttons in the main toolbar and via configurable keyboard shortcuts, along with the standard ``ipdb`` `console commands`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can control debugger execution via the buttons in the main toolbar and :guilabel:`Debugger` pane, as well as from the :guilabel:`Debug` menu and via configurable keyboard shortcuts, along with the standard ``ipdb`` `console commands`_.
```

* I suggest to change the order from most to least used methods to control the debugger (considering also that shortcuts are meant for advanced users).
* This also goes well with my previous suggestion.

You can access and edit local and global variables at each breakpoint through the :ref:`panes-variables`.

.. image:: /images/debugging/debugging-variables.webp
   :alt: Spyder's Console and Variable Explorer showing local and global variables when debugging

.. _panes-debugger-stack:

===================
Stack frame browser
===================

> New in Spyder 6, the Spyder :guilabel:`Debugger` pane now features a stack frame browser, allowing you to easily view and explore the execution stack while debugging.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
New in Spyder 6, the :guilabel:`Debugger` pane now features a stack frame browser, allowing you to easily view and explore the execution stack while debugging.
```

No need to repeat `Spyder` (after saying `Spyder 6`).

.. note::

>    Each time your code calls into a function, it is added to the stack and execution continues inside that function, with further levels being added if that function calls another function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Each time your code calls a function, it is added to the stack and execution continues inside that function, with further levels being added if it calls more functions.
```

* `into` sounds a bit weird to me as a non-native speaker.
* Avoid repeating `that function`.
* Make the ending sound a bit better.

Author: ```suggestion
   Each time your code calls a function, it is added to the stack and execution continues inside that function, with further levels being added if that function itself calls further functions.
```

Agreed, except with the second point as clarity trumps repetition and "it" in that context is ambiguous, it could mean that function or it could also mean the user's code, which would imply every time _any_ function is called further levels are added to the stack rather than specifically when a function calls another function, etc.

   When a function finishes executing and returns, it is popped from the stack and execution continues with the function that called it, on the previous level of the stack.

>    Each level of the stack has its own namespace, i.e. its own local variables, and normally cannot directly access those defined within other levels, so that local variables in someone else's function don't conflict with your own.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Each level of the stack has its own namespace, i.e. its own local variables, and normally cannot directly access those defined within other levels, so that local variables in different functions don't conflict among them.
```

By `someone else's function` I guess you mean library code (in contrast to users own code). But I think that's not so clear for people, so I propose this rewrite.

Author: ```suggestion
   Each level of the stack has its own namespace, i.e. its own local variables, and normally cannot directly access those defined within other levels, so that variables in different functions don't conflict.
```

Fixed/simplified your phrasing and removed an instance of repetition from my original

>    You can think of it like a "stack" of papers, which each paper being a function that forms one level of execution, the values of local variables being written only on that one sheet of paper and papers being added or removed only from the top of the stack.

Reviewer: Cool analogy!

The highest-level code where execution started is shown at the top, while the lowest-level function, the one currently executing, is shown at the bottom, just like in an error traceback.
From left to right, you can see the filename, line number in the file and the line of code that was last executed at that level.

> Clicking any line will jump to that level in the execution stack, allowing you to run code there in the :guilabel:`IPython Console`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Clicking any line will jump to that level in the execution stack, allowing you to run code in that context in the :guilabel:`IPython Console`.
```

Be more explicit about this.

> Furthermore, it will display that file in the :guilabel:`Editor`, with the arrow icon pointing to the line that was run there, and the :guilabel:`Variable Explorer` will switch to show the values of the local variables visible in that stack frame's namespace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, it will also display that file in the :guilabel:`Editor`, with the arrow icon pointing to the line that was run there, and the :guilabel:`Variable Explorer` will switch to show the values of the local variables visible in that stack frame's namespace.
```

Seems missing.

Author: Its a bit redundant to say "Furthermore...also" since they are synonyms

Reviewer: I thought so but then could we change `Furthermore` by `Besides` to keep `also`?

Author: "Besides" wouldn't be idiomatic/good phrasing here. But I'm not strongly opposed to your suggestion if you are still convinced of it.

.. _panes-debugger-postmortem:

The stack frame browser also allows you to explore the levels of an exception traceback when an error occurs in your code.
When an exception is raised, it is automatically displayed in the browser, in the same format as the debugger stack, and you can click each level of the traceback to jump to that file and line.
To jump into the live debugger at the point the error occurred, press the :guilabel:`Start debugging after last error` button in the :guilabel:`Debugger` pane toolbar.
You can then use the stack frame browser as before to view and interact with the code and variables at different levels of the execution stack, by simply clicking them.

> The Debugger pane remembers the last error that occurred even if you run further code or make changes to your files, up until you either jump into the Debugger or another error is raised.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Debugger pane remembers the last error that occurred even if you run further code or make changes to your files, up until you either start a debugging session or another error is raised.
```

I think this is clearer than `jump into the Debugger`.

Advanced features
=================

You can avoid stepping through other Python packages while debugging by enabling the :guilabel:`Ignore Python libraries while debugging` option in Spyder's Preferences, under :menuselection:`Debugger --> Interaction`.
This will skip stopping on any line of code inside the built-in and third-party Python modules you have installed, to focus on debugging your own code.

.. image:: /images/debugging/debugging-libraries.webp
   :alt: Spyder's preferences, showing the Ignore Python libraries while debugging option

> If your code has variables with the same names as IPDB commands (e.g. ``b`` or ``step``), you can still refer to those variables as normal while debugging.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your code has variables with the same names as IPdb commands (e.g. ``b`` or ``step``), you can still refer to those variables as normal while debugging.
```

To go with my suggestion above.

> To call the respective IPDB command, just add an exclamation point before it (e.g. ``!b`` or ``!step``).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To call the respective IPdb command, just add an exclamation point before it (e.g. ``!b`` or ``!step``).
```

Same as before.

.. image:: /images/debugging/debugging-commands.webp

>    :alt: Spyder's IPython Console, showing how to type IPDB commands with an exclamation mark

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   :alt: Spyder's IPython Console, showing how to type IPdb commands with an exclamation mark
```

You can have Spyder automatically execute a custom snippet of code every time the debugger stops.
For example, you can use this to set specific variables, or import commonly-used modules so they are always available while debugging.

> To set this up, go to :menuselection:`Preferences --> Debugger --> Run code while debugging`, and enter the code that you want to be executed with each step.

Reviewer: Is that code executed at each step (as mentioned here) or only when the debugging session starts? I think the latter is what we actually do, so leaving this note to check that in our code.

Author: I tested it just now in 6.x, it indeed does what it says here, running once every time the debugger steps (i.e. each new prompt).

<img width="1511" height="491" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/17b387e4-0f44-4c92-b0a1-9e2da1276a87" />

Advanced features
=================

If your code is taking a long time to run, or you want to see what it is doing at any given point, you can use the :guilabel:`Inspect execution` button in the :guilabel:`Debugger` pane toolbar.
This retrieves the current stack frame from the kernel and displays it in the :ref:`panes-debugger-stack`, without interrupting execution or launching a new debugging session.

> To actually stop executing your code and launch the debugger inside the current execution, use the :guilabel:`Interrupt execution and start the debugger` button in the :guilabel:`Debugger` pane toolbar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To actually stop executing your code and launch the debugger inside the current execution, use the :guilabel:`Interrupt execution and start the debugger` button in the pane's toolbar.
```

Avoid repeating `Debugger pane toolbar`, which was used in the previous paragraph.

> This starts a live debugging session, in which you can run code and inspect variables as well as browse the stack.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This starts a live debugging session, in which you can run code and inspect variables to try to understand why the execution is taking too long to finish.
```

Be more explicit about what this feature is useful for.

> The :guilabel:`Debugger` pane also automatically displays the full traceback of the last exception raised by your code in the :ref:`panes-debugger-stack`, including the full error traceback, which it remembers even if you run something else or make changes to your files, until you either start a debugging session or another exception occurs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The :guilabel:`Debugger` pane also automatically displays the full traceback of the last exception raised by your code in the :ref:`panes-debugger-stack`, which it remembers even if you run something else or make changes to your files, until you either start a debugging session or another exception occurs.
```

Seems unnecessary (see previous clause).

   :alt: Debugger showing matplotlib interactive backend

> To avoid showing plots while debugging, deactivate the :guilabel:`Process execute events while debugging` option in :menuselection:`Preferences --> Debugger --> Interaction`.

Reviewer: There are two more advanced features we added in Spyder 6:
* `Interrupt execution and start the debugger` (see the button with the corresponding tooltip in the pane), which stops the current execution and enters the debugger to see why it's taking too long.
* `Inspect execution`, which asks the kernel for the current stack frame and shows it in the pane but without interrupting the execution.

Please add text for those features too.

Author: Okay, I can add those manually once your other suggestions are applied.

Author: Added, as well as did some further editing and re-organization accordingly of relevant bits
